>>And I think many
people today don't
know what to believe anymore.
>>People are basically
going to keep on
to help uncover what
really happened.
>>It felt like something
was watching me.
>>We weren't given
all the information.
We weren't told
the entire story.
>>GEORGE NOORY: Welcome
back to "Beyond Belief,"
with Olav Philips, a conspiracy
researcher, our special guest
tonight.
We're going to be
talking about a subject
that I have investigated,
and it's probably still
one of the most frightening
stories I've ever come across.
Back in the 1960s
and into the '70s,
there was somebody called
the Zodiac Killer up
in northern California.
He got his name, of course,
by some of the symbols
that he sent to newspapers
in the Bay Area.
He's responsible for
killing at least five
people but maybe up to 28
people, maybe 37 people.
Nobody really knows.
Olav, one of the most
frightening stories
that hit this country
in a long, long time.
>>OLAV PHILLIPS: Absolutely.
The Zodiac, even to this
day, is frightening.
Because there was never
really proper closure.
And it's one of those things
in the Bay Area, you know,
it really stained the
San Francisco Bay Area
quite significantly.
>>NOORY: There's no
question about it.
This individual, this
person, this freak,
would literally push
the police departments.
And he loved publicity.
>>PHILLIPS: He loved--
I mean, he called them.
There are at least
two instances where
he called the
dispatcher and a second
where he called a very
famous radio program, radio
host in the Bay Area.
He had a TV show at the time.
He called into it.
He's like, I'm the Zodiac.
>>JIM DUNBAR: Tell us what's
going on inside you right now,
Sam.
Please.
>>SAM: I have headache.
>>JIM DUNBAR: All right.
>>MELVIN BELLI: How long have
you had those headaches, Sam?
Been a long time?
>>SAM: Since I killed a kid.
>>MELVIN BELLI: If it all
boils down to the question that
you're giving yourself up if
you could be assured that you
wouldn't get capital
punishment for myself--
>>SAM: No, I wouldn't
give myself up.
>>MELVIN BELLI: Huh?
>>SAM: I wanna kill those kids.
>>NOORY: And you
think that was real?
>>PHILLIPS: I do.
I mean, it's his whole MO.
>>NOORY: Did he kind of bait
the police and bait the media?
>>PHILLIPS: He baited everybody.
He sent them
cryptograms, saying, OK,
if you can figure
out this code, it'll
tell you who the next
person I'm going to kill is.
Or if you can figure
out this code,
it'll tell you where I am.
So constantly he would
send them letters
and do things to try to--
he would do things out
in the open.
I mean, he was really, really,
really trying to get caught.
And they just couldn't do it.
They just could not
crack what he was doing.
>>NOORY: He wanted to get caught
without wanting to get caught.
>>PHILLIPS: Yeah.
Yeah.
He was taunting them.
Not that I'm a specialist in
serial killers, far from it.
But out of all the serial
killers I've ever seen,
he was the one that taunted
the police the most.
Most of these guys,
they're very quiet.
They just do the thing.
He was out there.
He was pushing the
police quite often.
>>NOORY: Frustrating
for them, wasn't it?
>>PHILLIPS: Incredibly
frustrating.
I think it still is frustrating.
Because there are other ideas
and thoughts and theories
of who he was.
>>NOORY: There are a
handful of suspects.
>>PHILLIPS: There's a
handful of suspects,
a few really strong ones.
But even to this day,
it's still an open case.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
One of the things that I think
hurt the investigation, Olav,
is you did have a lot of
people come in saying,
my father-in-law was
the Zodiac Killer.
This guy was the Zodiac Killer.
My friend was the Zodiac Killer.
And so when you had three or
four different people coming
in with three or four different
sources, of which evidence
they found little pieces
of what could be true--
whether the handwriting matched
the letters, whether a DNA
portion matched
something else, like
who licked the stamp
and things like that.
It must have been a very
frustrating for police.
>>PHILLIPS: You know, I think
it was the whole 80/20 rule
enacted in real life, right?
This notion that you can
get 80% of the way there,
but that last 20%, you
just can't conquer it.
And so every time,
they're getting close.
They're getting close.
But they're falling away.
They're falling away.
They can never get over the
hump to actually nail it.
And I think that
was probably one
of the most frustrating things.
There are people
in the police that
had spent their entire careers
trying to understand why he did
it, what he did exactly,
because nobody's entirely
sure, as you pointed out, how
many people he actually killed?
And were they all
in the Bay Area?
I mean, there are people that
have done research that claimed
that he murdered
people in Oregon,
people in Nevada, Utah,
that he went to the East
Coast and murdered people.
>>NOORY: And may still be alive.
>>PHILLIPS: And may still be
alive, murdering more people.
>>NOORY: Murdering
more, exactly.
Did he kill in
couples primarily?
As opposed to individuals?
>>PHILLIPS: He did do
a couple of couples
and a couple of individuals.
>>NOORY: So he was
all over the map?
>>PHILLIPS: Yeah.
The one thing that I've
never really understood
is how he selected his targets.
>>NOORY: Was it random?
>>PHILLIPS: I don't think
it was entirely random, no.
There's something
about them that--
>>NOORY: You think he knew them?
>>PHILLIPS: I
think he knew them,
or I think that they
represented something to him,
or they had some
feature of them that he
disliked for some reason.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
I mean, with every serial
killer, something's happened.
>>PHILLIPS: There's
something there.
>>NOORY: When they
were little kids.
>>PHILLIPS: Yeah.
And I know that sounds
really broad and nebulous.
The problem with the Zodiac is
that it is broad and nebulous.
By its very nature, it's
completely broad and nebulous.
You've got bodies,
but that's it.
You've got bodies and letters
and a couple phone calls.
And that's really all you got.
>>NOORY: One of the suspects
was a newspaper editor.
Tell us about that case.
>>PHILLIPS: Yeah, that's
Richard Gaikowski.
He was a reporter.
He was an editor of
a little newspaper
in Martinez, California.
I want to say he was also an
editor at "Good Times," which
was a very volatile newspaper
in San Francisco as well.
>>NOORY: Why was he a suspect?
>>PHILLIPS: Well, he
was in the right places
at the wrong times, so to speak.
He had training.
There was at least-- if
I remember correctly,
one of the murders, there
were something very technical
about it that they believed
that the individual had
to have some medical
training because
of the way it was carried out.
He was a trained army medic.
There were a lot of
timings and locations
that fit very well for him.
He also, as a
reporter, had written
a series of very bizarre
articles, at least
at the Martinez newspaper.
He had written very
bizarre articles.
>>NOORY: About the victims?
>>PHILLIPS: No, about
things in general.
One instance where a
person was attacked
and he explained
the way the person
was attacked in terms of eating,
like Thanksgiving dinner.
>>NOORY: Almost as
if he was writing it
from the perspective
of the attacker?
>>PHILLIPS: Yes.
That happened a number
times, at least in Martinez.
>>NOORY: Like he was there.
>>PHILLIPS: Like he was there,
or like he could visualize it.
If he wasn't there,
he was definitely
visualizing what was happening.
>>NOORY: Was it public
that he was a suspect?
>>PHILLIPS: I believe it was.
I mean, he's been referred to
in books and things nowadays.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
And he's dead now?
>>PHILLIPS: He's dead.
He died in 2004 of cancer.
>>NOORY: But he seems
to still come back?
>>PHILLIPS: Apparently, yes.
>>NOORY: What's going on?
>>PHILLIPS: So one of the
places that he was an editor
was a little
newspaper in Martinez,
California called "The
Martinez News Gazette."
And apparently, he haunts the
building, that his ghost--
>>NOORY: He haunted
the building?
>>PHILLIPS: He
haunts the building.
>>NOORY: What does he do?
>>PHILLIPS: He does
a lot of things.
He moves things around.
He pushes people.
He hits them.
He turns lights on and off.
He breaks things.
>>NOORY: So maybe the
Zodiac Killer's still around
in some form or fashion?
>>PHILLIPS: Yeah,
basically, yes.
So we, me and some
other people, we
went to The Martinez
News Gazette,
and we attempted to
contact Gaikowski.
>>NOORY: And were
you successful?
>>PHILLIPS: We were.
>>NOORY: What happened?
>>PHILLIPS: At first,
when we got there,
and this is where
it gets interesting.
We first got there,
nothing happened.
>>NOORY: And you went
there with the intent
of contacting his spirit?
>>PHILLIPS: Yes, and
confronting him, as much
as that's possible
to a ghost, right?
But I think there's
a notion that you
go into a haunted house, and
things start spinning around.
And that's not the way it is.
A lot of times when you go
into a haunted house, nothing
happens.
Nothing happens for a long time.
And there's this magic 3 a.m.
number.
Supposedly at 3 a.m. things
start to come unglued.
That doesn't always
happen either.
You could go an
entire investigation
and never see a thing.
In this case, it
started out very slowly,
but not a lot was going on.
And there's one
person in particular
who worked at the
newspaper who he targeted.
And he would push her around,
and rearrange her desk
and things like that.
And so she tried to--
she called him out.
And she reminded him that,
hey, we're filming this.
And the minute she said,
hey, we're filming this
and we're going to try to talk
about this with other people,
then suddenly, things
start to happen.
But it wasn't until
he knew that he
was going to get some
notoriety from it that he
started actually to do things.
>>NOORY: Why do you think
he would want to continue
haunting the Martinez Gazette?
>>PHILLIPS: Well, the thing
about the Martinez Gazette
is that by all accounts,
he was happiest there.
It's a little newspaper
in a little town.
It's actually one of
the oldest newspapers--
>>NOORY: Was it his newspaper?
>>PHILLIPS: No, but
he was the editor,
and he had a lot
of freedom there.
And supposedly he was
pretty happy there.
It's a very old newspaper.
In fact, if you
go to the Gazette,
they actually have
a copy of the issue
they put out that announced
that Abraham Lincoln had
been assassinated.
It's an extremely old newspaper.
>>NOORY: Still around?
>>PHILLIPS: Still around, yeah.
And I think the age of it,
and the freedom that he had,
and the flexibility that
he had, he liked it.
And so he came back there.
Because I think in some ways it
represented to him good times.
But even as it
represents good times,
he still did evil things.
So you can't divorce the
fact that he is evil.
>>NOORY: Was there
anything that he
did in the afterlife
that would lead
you to believe that he might
have been the Zodiac Killer?
>>PHILLIPS: Well, we
started to taunt him.
>>NOORY: On purpose?
>>PHILLIPS: On purpose.
Not a wise move.
>>NOORY: Not a wise move at all.
>>PHILLIPS: And we started to
hear-- there's a drop ceiling.
And they have those panels.
We heard things moving around
in the crawl space up above us.
And we went up there, and
we started to film it.
And we got a shadow
person moving around
inside the crawl space.
>>NOORY: You could feel that?
>>PHILLIPS: You could feel it.
>>NOORY: What kind
of equipment did you
bring for something like that?
>>PHILLIPS: We
brought EM generators.
We brought thermal cameras,
normal cameras, SP7 boxes,
pretty much all
the normal stuff.
>>NOORY: Sometimes when you're
on an investigation like that,
the little ghostly apparition
starts playing around
with the equipment.
>>PHILLIPS: Definitely.
>>NOORY: You know, pulling
power and things like that.
Did you have anything
strange happen there?
>>PHILLIPS: Yeah,
he actually blew up
one of our EM field generators.
>>NOORY: No.
>>PHILLIPS: Yeah, he blew it up.
We were down below, and we
could hear him moving around
up there, continuing
to taunt him,
of course, which is unwise.
>>NOORY: Tell me
what a spirit box is.
>>PHILLIPS: That's an SP7.
It's a small device that
has a frequency skipper.
And so what it does
it cycles through all
the frequencies in the FM band.
And what you do is, you
ask the spirit questions
and then the spirit can speak
through it, which shouldn't
happen, because it's skipping
through the radio stations
so fast you can't
make out words.
>>NOORY: That's kind of a
bizarre aspect of all of this,
isn't it?
>>PHILLIPS: Yeah.
I mean, using the
spirit box, we actually
got him in his own words to
admit that he was the Zodiac.
And I think that's
very significant.
>>NOORY: What other
strange things might
have happened out there, Olav?
>>PHILLIPS: He was moving
things, turning lights
on and off.
One of the people that was
involved in the investigation
actually became overwhelmed
and had to go outside.
Actually, that happened twice
to two different people.
>>NOORY: When he wrote stories
about the Zodiac Killer,
did he write stories better
than any other media out there?
>>PHILLIPS: That's
my understanding.
He did, I believe, do
a couple stories on it.
And he also talked to a guy that
he worked with at "Good Times."
And he seemed to have a
little too much knowledge
of what had happened.
>>NOORY: I mean,
would he say things
like, you can only imagine what
was going through the victims'
minds when the
Zodiac Killer came up
on the left side of a car
and appeared into the window?
>>PHILLIPS: Yeah, according to
the guy who's the informant who
he worked with at "Good Times."
>>NOORY: Somebody turned him in?
>>PHILLIPS: Yeah.
>>NOORY: We'll talk
about that in a second.
>>PHILLIPS: Yeah, but
according to that guy,
he would say, yeah,
isn't it strange
how he pointed them to the
north, the bodies to the north?
>>NOORY: Yeah.
And who would know that?
>>PHILLIPS: Only
the Zodiac Killer.
>>NOORY: The cops must
have read his columns
and said, how in the heck does
this guy know that the victims
were pointed toward the north?
>>PHILLIPS: Yeah, but I think--
>>NOORY: That's a red flag.
>>PHILLIPS: It's a red flag, but
I think that also he was smart,
so I think he could
explain it away.
>>NOORY: Plus, he's a remote
viewer or a psychic, right?
>>PHILLIPS: Right.
>>NOORY: Who knows?
>>PHILLIPS: Ah, you never know.
What other strange occurrences
when you were investigating?
>>PHILLIPS: We had flashlights
that would turn on and off.
We actually got to a
point where we had set up
a series of flashlights, and
we could ask him questions
and get him to turn the
flashlights on and off.
>>NOORY: And you
felt his presence?
>>PHILLIPS: The temperature,
once he became active,
the temperature in the place
dropped by at least 15 degrees.
>>NOORY: Of all the
suspects that are out there,
and like I said, there's
a handful of them,
would you say that he might
have been the biggest suspect?
>>PHILLIPS: Listening to
him talk on the SP7, I mean,
it's very pointed.
He says, I am the Zodiac.
He's very clear.
And all the communications
that we had through the SP7
or in other ways
were very clear.
His intent was very clear.
When I was in that
building, and it's not
a big building, but when
I was in that building--
>>NOORY: And that
building's still there?
>>PHILLIPS: The building's
still there, yeah.
And the newspaper's
still in the building.
>>NOORY: Did it scare
you when you were there?
>>PHILLIPS: Yes.
>>NOORY: And you
don't get scared?
>>PHILLIPS: No.
More than any haunted
location I've ever been to,
you could just feel it.
>>NOORY: Evil.
>>PHILLIPS: You could
feel the malevolence.
>>NOORY: Pure, pure evil.
>>PHILLIPS: And when
he was doing things,
he was messing with you.
And you knew that he
was messing with you.
You knew that he was there,
and he was after you.
>>NOORY: Olav, if
somebody like that
reincarnates-- I believe
in reincarnation.
There's just too many
strange stories about that.
>>PHILLIPS: No, I do as well.
I do as well.
>>NOORY: Let's assume
he reincarnates.
Does he come back better?
Or does he come back
as the Zodiac Killer,
and he does it all over again?
>>PHILLIPS: I like to
believe that if and when
we reincarnate, that we do it
to learn from our past mistakes,
to make us better people.
So I want to believe that
if he were to reincarnate,
that he would
reincarnate in a way that
would make him a better person
and to atone for the evil
that he had done.
>>NOORY: Now, let's
make an assumption.
>>PHILLIPS: Sure.
>>NOORY: Just an assumption
that the Zodiac Killer is still
alive.
He would be in his '70s.
Could he still be killing?
>>PHILLIPS: Yeah, he could.
>>NOORY: That's a
scary thought though.
>>PHILLIPS: He could.
He absolutely could if he
took take care of himself
and he wasn't suffering
from dementia or something.
>>NOORY: I mean, the
FBI says at any given
time there are 50 serial
killers roaming the country.
Can you believe that?
Killing anywhere from two to
God knows how many people.
>>PHILLIPS: I can.
I can believe it.
I mean, it's disturbing.
It is disturbing.
>>NOORY: The Zodiac Killer
had short hair, had glasses.
>>PHILLIPS: Had glasses.
>>NOORY: Does Robert
fit that bill?
>>PHILLIPS: Yes.
>>NOORY: The sketch came from a
victim who did not die, right?
>>PHILLIPS: That's correct.
Who got away.
>>NOORY: It was female?
>>PHILLIPS: It was a woman.
Yeah.
>>NOORY: Only person I think who
would be able to identify him.
>>PHILLIPS: Only person who
ever actually saw him, clearly
saw him.
>>NOORY: They did not have,
obviously, enough evidence
to arrest him or to
even have a trial.
How come?
>>PHILLIPS: I mean,
he was careful.
There was only the one time,
I think, with the taxi driver
that he was hurried.
I mean, the Zodiac
Killer was very careful.
There wasn't a lot of evidence.
>>NOORY: Tell me
about the taxi driver.
>>PHILLIPS: He
attacked a taxi driver.
>>NOORY: To kill?
>>PHILLIPS: I think
it was accidental.
I think he just got confronted,
and he-- yeah, he killed him.
>>NOORY: Huh.
Was he trying to get
away from something?
>>PHILLIPS: Yeah, I think
he was trying to run,
and the guy got in his way.
And he had mistimed something.
But the thing
about the Zodiac is
that the reason that
he lasted so long
is because he was careful.
>>NOORY: And we really
didn't have DNA then.
>>PHILLIPS: No, there
was no DNA then.
And he positioned things.
He created the crime scene.
He would go in.
He would put the bodies
where he wanted them.
He'd cover the bodies
the way he wanted them.
>>NOORY: Truly amazing.
>>PHILLIPS: It's truly amazing.
>>NOORY: All the
people love your work.
How do they find you?
>>PHILLIPS: Anomalies.net.
>>NOORY: Anomalies.net.
Thanks for being
on "Beyond Belief."
>>PHILLIPS: Thank
you for having me.
>>NOORY: It's hard to believe
that maybe a former newspaper
editor might have been
the Zodiac Killer,
or that the Zodiac Killer
is indeed still around.
Kind of frightening what's
out there, isn't it?
Just watch yourself
when you're in the dark.
I'm George Noory.
This is "Beyond Belief."